RFD 01: Web Staging (#786)
gravitational/next: rfd/RFD-01-Web-Staging.md

> # Web Staging

Reviewer: I wouldn't call this "Staging", the scope here is both staging and production deploys.  Maybe "Web Deployment" or "Next Generation Web Deployment".  Naming things is hard.

Author: ```suggestion
# Web Deployment
```

## Author: Cole Styron
## Status: draft

## Purpose

> Creation of a new website staging environment after the probable retirement of the `gravitational/web` repository.

Reviewer: Similar to above: this isn't just staging, we need this deploy model to be able to retire the web repo.

Author: updated.

- roughly 1000 pages of docs are hosted at `gravitational/teleport` and imported as submodules into `gravitational/next`
- roughly 100 pages of user-facing marketing pages are hosted on `gravitational/next`
- roughly 200 pages of blog articles are hosted on `gravitational/next`
- a few remaining pages are hosted on `gravitational/web` but should be ported to `gravitational/next` by the end of February 2022.

The intention at present is for `gravitational/web` to be deprecated entirely and for the routing functionality currently in `gravitational/web/deploy/nginx.*` to be ported to Vercel and/or `gravitational/next`.

However discussions are now underway concerning the **possible** separation of the three main parts of `goteleport.com`: the main website (hereafter the "marketing site"), the blog, and the docs would each live in separate repos and potentially leverage separate site generation technologies, e.g. Next, Gatsby, or combination with headless CMS.

For SEO purposes, subdomains, e.g. `docs.goteleport.com` are probably not going to be used.

## Desired Functionality of the new Staging Environment

> 1. at least one static domain connected to the staging environment to be registered with Semrush (our SEO monitoring service) to monitor SEO impact before push to production

Reviewer: Does every change need a semrush run, or only some changes?

Author: updated

2. ability to push to staging automatically on merge with a possible `staging` or `seo` branch (probably to the static url above), triggering a new build of all three repos, not just the local one
3. ability to preview builds in the local repo without rebuilding the other two

> 4. ability for multiple users to use staging simultaneously for distinct builds

Reviewer: 1 and 4 pretty explicitly conflict with each other as written.  Consider rephrasing to be express the goal, while remaining implementation agnostic.

For example:

"The ability to run semrush checks on a change before it is deployed to production".

This tells us what we want, without going into how we go about it "pushing to a staging or seo branch'.  Maybe we decouple the idea of "staging" and semrush validation, or "staging" and distinct builds.

Author: Updated, although I'm not going to be shy about expressing implementation requests where I feel they're important for workflow.

## Security 

> Unknown at present

Reviewer: Some considerations:

All of next is open source, where as all of web is closed.  Do we want all of docs, blog articles, and the marketing site to be open source?  In general, I want to push us towards transparency and openness, but I also recognize there may be some benefit to having a private place to prototype stuff.

Will all contributors need a vercel account?  What will the path to merge be for folks that aren't regular contributors, but may put in a typo fix here or there.  E.g. far flung, but responsible employees.  Or if open source, folks outside the org who notice a typo in the site and want to fix it.

Author: @wadells I'm also of the opinion that as much as possible should be open source; I don't see a case where we need privacy.  Currently the docs live in `gravitational/teleport` which is a public repo as well. 

As far as contributors needing a Vercel account, I'd love @alexwolfe to weigh in.

## UX

> It is becoming increasingly common for non-technical marketing personnel to make changes to the user-facing website in the form of updates to marketing copy or adding/removing events using GitHub's web GUI (and potentially GitHub Desktop). Currently "preview" deploys are auto-generated by Vercel, but they are only built for pages in the local repository.

Reviewer: I don't understand "the local repository" part of "they are only built for pages in the local repository."   I thought vercel previews were generated for all pull requests opened to Next.

Author: I'll try to give an example.  Also, I am certainly capable of mis-using common terms, so feel free to correct me if it's apparent that's what I'm doing.
Currently, the blog lives in `gravitational/web` (using Hugo) and the marketing site in `gravitational/next`, but let's suppose a fictional new home for the blog `gravitational/blog` which will use Next.js rather than Hugo.  If you're making a change to the marketing site that links to a blog post or vice-versa (there are some other cases besides linking where this is a problem too), the deploy preview does not have access to the "other" repo's build within the preview.  
As an example, if the preview url is generated in `gravitational/next` as `https://teleport-docs-next-bsusq6eub-gravitational.vercel.app/` then `https://teleport-docs-next-bsusq6eub-gravitational.vercel.app/blog/**.mdx` returns a 404 - a problem when you're testing links and running SEO analyses.
So in terms of aim rather than implementation, it would be ideal to have a way to generate a preview that  built for all repositories, not just the "local" one (in this case `/next`).

## Considerations

The current state of user-facing side of `goteleport.com` is as follows: 
- routing is handled by nginx and its config files are hosted on `gravitational/web`
- roughly 1000 pages of docs are hosted at `gravitational/teleport` and imported as submodules into `gravitational/next`
- roughly 100 pages of user-facing marketing pages are hosted on `gravitational/next`
- roughly 200 pages of blog articles are hosted on `gravitational/web`
- a few remaining pages are hosted on `gravitational/web` but should be ported to `gravitational/next` by the end of February 2022.

The intention at present is for `gravitational/web` to be deprecated entirely and for the routing functionality currently in `gravitational/web/deploy/nginx.*` to be ported to Vercel and/or `gravitational/next`.

However separation of the three main parts of `goteleport.com` is now underway: the main website (hereafter the "marketing site"), the blog, and the docs will each live in separate repos. Furthermore, the new home of the blog, `gravitational/blog` will shortly be connected to a CMS (probably Contentful).

> For SEO purposes, subdomains, e.g. `docs.goteleport.com` will not be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SEO purposes, subdomains (such as `docs.goteleport.com` or `blog.goteleport.com`) will 301 redirect to paths under the main site (e.g. `goteleport.com/docs` or `goteleport.com/blog`).
```

- rewrites and redirects within a domain are also possible within `next.config.js`
- redirecting a subdomain to a subpath is NOT POSSIBLE in either Vercel or Next.js (Vercel has stated this may be possible in a future release). In order to redirect subdomains to subpaths, it will be necessary to retain nginx.

In testing live redirects using a combination of nginx and `next.config.mjs` with the `gravitational/next`repo, the `gravitational/web` repo, and the new `gravitational/blog` repo, the following results were obtained: 
- using nginx to proxy all paths with `/blog/` to `gravitational/next` and THEN
- using `next.config.mjs` to rewrite `/blog/*` paths to `gravitational/blog` resulted in inconsistent performance; sometimes the blog pages loaded, always with broken images, sometimes a "too many redirects" error occurred. 

- removing the rewrites from `next.config.mjs` and instead proxing `/blog/` hits directly to `gravitational/blog` resulted in the desired functionality.  

## Further considerations from @wadells up for discussion (to be incorporated above)

- Will there be a cache/CDN/DDOS protection? What provides that?

> - Nginx will have to be regtained, where will it be hosted, and how will we deploy?

Reviewer: "regtained" looks like a typo

Author: fixed
